Computer Forensics
Investigation Process

Module 02

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Exam 312-49

Designed by

Module 02

. Presented by Professionals.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator v9

Module 02: Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Module 02 Page 61

Exam 312-49

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

—(>) After successfully completing this module, you will be able a \

Understand the importance of computer forensics process

Describe the various phases of the computer forensics investigation process

Identify the requirements for building a computer forensics lab and an investigation team

Understand the roles of a First Responder

Perform search and seizure, evidence collection, management and preservation

Understand chain of custody and its importance

Discuss about data duplication, deleted data recovery and evidence examination

| |
Write an investigative report and testify in a court room -

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproduction isStrictlyProhibited.

The computer forensics investigation process includes a methodological approach for preparing
for the investigation, collecting and analyzing digital evidence, and managing the case right
from the time of reporting to the conclusion. This module describes the different stages
involved in the complete computer investigation process. The module also highlights the role of
expert witnesses in solving a computer crime case and the importance of formal investigation
reports presented in a court of law during the trial. This module will discuss the topics
mentioned in the slide:

Module 02 Page 62 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

_ Importance of Computer

The rapid increase of cyber crimes has led to the development
of various laws and standards that define cyber crimes, digital
evidence, search and seizure methodology, evidence recovery
and the investigation process

The investigators must follow a forensics investigation process
that comply to local laws and established precedents. Any

deviation from the standard process may jeopardize the
complete investigation

As digital evidence are fragile in nature, a proper and
thorough forensic investigation process that ensures the
integrity of evidence is criticalto prove a case ina court of law

The investigators must follow a repeatable and well
documented set of steps such that every iteration of analysis
provides the same findings, or else the findings of the
investigation can be invalidated during the cross examination
ina court oflaw

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproduction isStrictlyProhibited.

The rapid increase in cybercrimes, ranging from theft of intellectual property to cyber terrorism
along with litigations involving large organizations, has made computer forensics necessary. The
process has also led to the development of various laws and standards that define cybercrimes,
digital evidence, search and seizure methodology, evidence recovery, and investigation process.

The staggering financial losses caused by computer crimes have made it necessary for
organizations to employ a computer forensic agency or hire a computer forensic expert to
protect the organization from computer incidents or solve cases involving the use of computers
and related technologies.

The investigators must follow a forensics investigation process that complies with local laws
and established standards; any deviation from the standard process may jeopardize the
complete investigation.

As digital evidence is fragile in nature, a proper and thorough forensic investigation process that
ensures the integrity of evidence is critical to prove a case in a court of law.

The investigators must follow a repeatable and well documented set of steps such that every
iteration of the analysis gives the same findings, else the findings of the investigation can be
invalidated during the cross examination in a court of law. The investigators should adopt
standard computer forensics processes so that the jury can replicate the process whenever
required.

Module 02 Page 63 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Involved in the

actual investigation

ation,
oproval

Investigation Phase:

in phase of the computer forensics investigation process

ervation, and analysis of evidentiary data to identify the i Ly
prit behind it Oe

Post-investigation Phase:
© Deals with the documentation of all the actions undertaken and findings during the
course of an investigation

© Ensures that the report is well explicable to the target audience. and provides
adequate and acceptable evidence

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproduction isStrictlyProhibited.

Pre-investigation Phase

This phase involves all the tasks performed prior to the commencement of the actual
investigation. It involves setting up a computer forensics lab, building a forensics workstation,
investigation toolkit, the investigation team, getting approval from the relevant authority, etc.

This phase also includes steps such as planning the process, defining mission goals, and securing
the case perimeter and devices involved.

Investigation Phase

Considered as the main phase of the computer forensics investigation, it involves acquisition,
preservation, and analysis of the evidentiary data to identify the source of crime and the
culprit. This phase involves implementing the technical knowledge to find the evidence,

examine, document, and preserve the findings as well as evidence. Trained professionals
perform all the tasks involved in this phase in order to ensure quality and integrity of the

findings.

Post-investigation Phase

This phase involves reporting and documentation of all the actions undertaken and the findings
during the course of an investigation. Ensure that the target audience can easily understand the
report as well as it provides adequate and acceptable evidence. Every jurisdiction has set
standards for reporting the findings and evidence; the report should comply with all such
standards as well as be legally sound and acceptable In the court of law.

Module 02 Page 64 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Exam 312-49

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproduction isStrictlyProhibited.

Investigators cannot jump into action immediately after receiving a complaint or report of a
security incident, but they have to follow a specific protocol that includes gathering of plaintiff
information, type of incident, and obtaining permission and warrants for taking further action.
All these processes combine to form the pre-investigation phase.

Module 02 Page 65

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

@ Qi

w@ A Computer Forensics Lab (CFL) is a location designated for conducting computer-based
investigation with regard to the collected evidence

i The lab houses instruments, software and hardware tools, suspect media, and forensic
workstations required to conduct the investigation

Zz Q

Setting up a forensics lab Includes:

.
Physical ) )
location

‘ ae Work area Physical ‘ Human
desi / considerati- security y/ resource

anes sulle ons recommen- considerati-
— dations ons
J - J J

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproduction isStrictly Prohibited.

A Computer Forensics Lab (CFL) is a designated location for conducting computer-based
investigation of the collected evidence in order to solve the case and find the culprit. The lab

houses the instruments, software and hardware tools, suspect media, and the forensic
workstations required to perform investigation of all types.

Setting up a forensics lab includes:
Planning and budgeting

Before planning and evaluating the budget for the forensic investigation case, consider the
following:

" Break down costs into daily and annual expenditure
= Refer to the investigation expenses in the past
=" Be aware of updated technology

» Use of statistics to obtain an idea about the computer crimes that are more likely to
occur

Physical location and structural design considerations
» Make sure the lab room Is secured
» Heavy construction materials need to be used
=» Make sure lab exteriors have no windows

Module 02 Page 66 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

» Ensure that computer systems are facing away from windows
=" Consider the room size and ventilation

=" Consider the room’s temperature and the number of workstations the room can occupy

Work area considerations

The lab area can affect its productivity. A lab has to include a workspace for every examiner.
Consider the following for the examiner workspaces:

» Examiner station requires an area of about 50-63 square feet
» The workplace requires a table that is big enough to examine a physical computer

» The forensic workstation requires a large enough space for additional equipment like
note pads, printers, etc.

Human resource considerations

All the examiners, technicians, and admins need to have certification and experience in their
respective fields.

Physical security recommendations
» The room must be small with good flooring and ceiling
» The door must have a strong locking system
» The room must have a secure container like a safe or file cabinet

» Visitor logs must be maintained

Forensics lab licensing

Forensics labs should have licensing from the concerned authorities to be trustworthy. The
authorities provide these licenses after reviewing the lab and the facilities it has for performing
the investigation. Some such licenses include:

#" ASCLD/LAB Accreditation
#» |SO/IEC 17025 Accreditation

Module 02 Page 67 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Considerations for the Planning and Budgeting of a Forensics Lab

Types of investigation to be conducted, based on
the crime statistics of the previous year and the Necessary software and hardware

expected trend

Number of cases expected Reference materials

Numbers of investigators/examiners to be involved

See fequired training Safe locker to store and secure original evidence

Forensic and non-forensic workstations’

requirement LAN and Internet connectivity

Space occupied, equipment required, UPS and

power supplies, etc Storage shelves for unused equipment

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproduction isStrictlyProhibited.

Planning for a Forensics Lab

The planning of a forensics lab includes the following:

A

Types of investigations being conducted: Choose the types of crimes the lab needs to
investigate based on the crime statistics of the previous year and the expected trend,
e.g., criminal, civil, or corporate. If the investigation is for a corporation, then decide if it
will be only internal or both internal and external. This will help in allocation of physical
resources as well as budget.

Forensic and non-forensic workstations requirement: The forensics lab should have
both forensics and non-forensics workstations for investigative purposes. There should
be ample space to disassemble the workstation if the need arises during the
investigative process.

Space occupied, equipment required, UPS and power supplies, etc.: A power failure
during an investigative process will prove costly for the investigator. The need for an
uninterrupted power supply is a preventive measure, and the lab should have separate
backup power generators. Ensure installation of stabilizers and proper maintenance of
the electrical connections, as any fluctuations in voltage may also disrupt the power
supply or damage equipment.

Reference Material: During the course of the Investigation, investigators may need to
access reference materials including books and digital books for assistance. Bookracks in
a forensics lap are necessary to store all the required reference books, articles, and
magazines. Racks help keep desks uncluttered, giving investigators more space to work.

Module 02 Page 68 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council

All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

5. Necessary software: Ensure use of licensed versions of all the software required for the
computer forensics investigation at any time during the investigation. Demo versions of
forensics software are not preferable as they offer limited functionality. Having licensed
versions also helps investigators during a trial. Use a demo version if and only if it
provides full functionality.

6. Safe locker and storage shelf: A safe locker large enough to store equipment required

for the forensics investigation should be available in the lab. This can help in
categorizing the equipment stored on the rack, helping the investigator to locate the

necessary equipment during the investigation. Safe lockers are also a means to keep
equipment safe and protect them from wear and tear, dust, and other foreign particles
that may hamper performance.

7. LAN and Internet connectivity: To share information among forensics workstations or
to do multiple tasks, a LAN is required. The LAN and internet connectivity are required
to perform a forensic investigation of remote networks.

8. Storage shelves for unused equipment: Keep the unused equipment on storage shelves
away from the main working area for the following reasons:

o To keep the forensics lab clean, tidy and to avoid unnecessary confusion amidst the
large amount of forensic digital equipment in the lab

o Makes finding a particular lab equipment easy

o The forensics lab contains sensitive equipment that can have a significant impact If
altered, such as magnetic and electrostatic devices

9. Number of investigators/examiners to be involved: The number of investigators
needed depends on the forensics case. Hiring trained and certified professionals Is
important for performing proper investigations.

Budget Allocation for a Forensics Lab

Budget allocation for developing a forensics laboratory depends on the total estimated cost
needed to meet the accreditation standards of a standardized body that certifies labs. In the
area of forensic science, the American Society of Crime Laboratory Directors acts as a certifying
body for crime labs. This standard also applies to computer forensics laboratories.

Allocate a yearly budget based on the previous year’s statistics as well as estimated future
trends for the next year. This includes the number of cases handled, the training required for
staff, upgrading hardware and software tools in the lab, additional equipment required for
enhancing the security of the lab premises, renovation of the lab, recruitment of additional
certified personnel if needed, and many other deciding factors.

Cybercrime statistics can reveal the nature of the damage done and the tools used to commit
the crime as well as the affected elements in the networked world. Purchase the necessary
specialized software needed to investigate a particular crime. Forensics lab requirements are
difficult to estimate, as the requirements change according to type of case and evidence.
However, over a period, the forensics lab would become well equipped and self-sufficient, with
all the technologies available that are necessary to handle the investigation.

Module 02 Page 69 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

and

Considerations

Physical Location Needs: Communication Needs:

W Dedicated Internet and communication
lines

W@ Site of the lab

W@ Access to emergency services

@ Multiple backups for communication

@ Physical milieu of the lab ee :
lines in case of emergencies

Design of parking facility Be Adedicnted petacrk

io

1 we La]

heen

Sm |

Environmental Needs:

Appropriate room size @ Good electricity supply

@ Good ventilation and air-conditioning Must have emergency power and

lighting systems

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproduction isStrictlyProhibited.

Physical Location Needs of a Forensics Lab

The physical location needs of a forensics lab are:

# Site of the lab: The site should have at least two directions of entry to ensure that one
can access the lab despite heavy traffic conditions, street maintenance work, or any
unexpected site disruptions.

=» Access to emergency services: There should be easy access to emergency services such
as the fire department and other emergency vehicles. It must also have access to
shipping and receiving without compromising the physical security of the lab.

= Lighting at the site: The site must have proper lighting designed to augment security
and discourage vandalism and unauthorized access to the lab. It should be similar to the
campus lighting of a university that conducts night classes.

* Physical milieu of the lab: The design must avoid:
o Bushes across 10 feet of the lab surroundings
o Clusters of bushes around the premises
o Tall evergreen trees

* Structural design of parking: The parking lot of the lab should have different levels.
These are a few recommendations for designing the levels of parking:

Module 02 Page 70 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process
o First level: It is a low security area; it must be close to the visitor entrance.

o Second level: Partially secured and fenced level used for shipping, waste pick-up,
and other activities requiring minimum security.

o Third level: A secured level that provides employees with access to the lab only with
the proximity keys or card keys.

o Fourth level: High-security area where only authorized personnel have access and
security personnel can monitor it.

* Environmental Conditions: The environmental conditions for proper functioning of a lab
are:

o Dimensions of the lab: The lab must be large. There must be sufficient space to
place all the equipment in the lab, without any congestion.

o Exchange rate of air: There must be a high exchange rate of air in the lab. The

exchange rate enhances the fresh air in the room and prevents unwanted odors in
the lab.

o Cooling systems: There must be proper cooling systems installed in the lab to
overcome the heat that workstations generate. It must be able to handle the RAID
server's heat output.

o Allocation of workstations: The dimensions of the lab will determine workstation
placement.

o Arrangement of workstations: The design of the lab will determine the arrangement
of workstations. There must be different workstations for different sections of the
lab.

# Electrical Needs: Following are the electrical needs of a computer forensics lab:

o Amperage: The lab must have good amperage of around 15 and 20 A required to run
the laboratory equipment.

o Emergency power and lighting: The lab should have emergency power and
protection for all the equioment from power fluctuations. It should have ample
lighting for the following sections of the laboratory:

e All the evidence sections
e All the security sections, electronic security systems, and telephones
e X-ray processing rooms and photography dark rooms
o Electrical Outlets: There must be easy access to the electrical outlets in the lab.

o Uninterrupted power supply: For all the workstations and the equipment, a
centralized UPS is preferred for a safe shutdown.

Module 02 Page 71 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

= Communication Needs: The different communication needs are:

o Dedicated connection: Install a dedicated ISDN for network and _ voice
communications.

o Dial-up access: Dial-up Internet access must be available for the workstations In the
laboratory.

o Disconnection: Disconnect the forensic computer from the network when it is not in
use.

o Network: A dedicated network is preferred for the forensic computer, as it requires
continuous access to the Internet and other resources on the network.

Module 02 Page 72 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council

All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Considerations

Work Area of a Computer Ambience of a Computer
Forensics Lab Forensics Lab

i An ideal lab consists of two forensic Investigators spend long hoursin a
workstations and one ordinary forensics lab, soit is importantto keep
workstation withI nternet connectivity the lab environment comfortable

Forensics workstations vary according to The height of ceilings, walls, flooring, and
the types of cases and processes so on contribute to the ambience of a
handled in the lab forensics lab

The work area should have ample space Ergonomics, lighting, room temperature,
for case discussions to take place among and communications form an important

investigators factor while considering the ambience
of a computer forensics lab

Be

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproduction isStrictly Prohibited.

The location of the forensics lab should be in an area with less human traffic. A forensic lab
generally has two workstations, but this number increases depending on the number of
investigation cases.

Design of the work area is subject to available financial resources. However, as the complexity
and number of cases increase, the workstation area will increase. It is advisable to have
separate rooms for supervisors and cubicles for investigators.

The work area should have ample space for discussing the cases among investigators as well as
enough room for each investigator to align and store all the files and equipment. The
productivity of the investigator will decrease in a cluttered workspace, thus hampering the
investigative process. The layout of the forensics lab should be scalable with ample room for
expansion.

Ambience of a Forensics Lab

Investigators spend long hours in a forensics lab, so it is of utmost importance that the
ambience of the lab is comfortable. Ergonomics, lighting, room temperature, and
communications form an important factor while considering the ambience of a computer
forensics lab.

The Ergonomics Society of the UK defines ergonomics as “the application of scientific
information concerning humans to the design of objects, systems and environment for human
use.” The society also defines ergonomic design as “a way of considering design options to

Module 02 Page 73 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

ensure that people’s capabilities and limitations are taken into account.” Physiology,
psychology, and anatomy are the three important elements of ergonomics.

The environment in the lab, such as humidity, airflow, ventilation, and room temperature, also
play an important factor. The lab should be able to handle more computers in case there is a
plan for expansion. Improper lighting in the lab will lead eyestrain for the investigators, which
may hamper their productivity.

Adjust lighting to avoid glare and keep the monitors at an angle of 90 degrees to the windows.
Painting on the walls should have a matte finish instead of a glazed finish. The height and make
of the ceilings, walls, flooring, etc. contribute to the ambience of a forensics lab. Do not use
false ceilings, as they weaken the security of the lab.

Module 02 Page 74 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Exam 312-49

Recommendations

Forensics labs should have only one entrance

All windows of the lab should be closed

A log register, containing visitor details such as
name, date and time of the visit, purpose, and
address of the visitor, should be maintained

Visitors should be provided with badgesto
easily distinguish them from the lab staff,
and assigned personnel for guiding them

An electronic sign-in log forall visitors should
be maintained

An added layer of protection in the form of

an intrusion alarm system should be installed
in the lab

Guards should be deployed around the
forensics lab premises

Closed-circuit cameras should be placed in

and around the lab to monitor human
movements

Here Prose

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproduction isStrictlyProhibited.

The level of physical security required for a forensics lab depends on the nature of
investigations performed in the lab. The assessment of risk for a forensics lab varies from
organization to organization. If the organization is a regional forensics lab, then the assessed
risk is high as the labs deal with multiple cases and different types of evidence. This may not be
true for the forensics lab of a private firm.

Maintain a log register at the entrance of the lab to record the following data: name of visitor
with date, time, purpose of the visit, name of contact person, and address of the visitor.
Provide visitors with passes to distinguish them from the lab staff. Place an alarm in the lab to
provide an additional layer of protection and deploy guards around the premises of the lab.
Place closed-circuit cameras in the lab and around Its premises to monitor human movement
within the lab. Ensure security of the lab by keeping all the windows closed. This helps prevent
unauthorized physical access to the lab from a covert channel.

Place fire extinguishers within and outside the lab, and provide training to the lab personnel
and guards on how to use the fire extinguisher, so that personnel know how to use the
equipment effectively in case of fire.

Shield workstations from transmitting electromagnetic signals, as electronic equipment emit
electromagnetic radiation, which can be helpful to discover the data the equipment is
transmitting or displaying. The solution is to shield emissions through a process the U.S.
Department of Defense has named TEMPEST.

Module 02 Page 75 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council

All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

It is stated by The National Industrial Security Program Operating Manual (NISPOM) that,
“TEMPEST is an unclassified short name referring to investigations and studies of compromising
emanations. Compromising emanations are unintentional intelligence-bearing signals that if
intercepted and analyzed will disclose classified information when it Is transmitted, received,
handled, or otherwise processed by any information processing equipment.”

To prevent eavesdropping, TEMPEST labs use sheets of metal, good conductors such as copper
for lining the walls, ceilings, and floor. Insulate the power cables to prevent radiation and add
filters to the telephones within the lab.

It is costly to build a TEMPEST lab, as it goes through checks and maintenance at regular
intervals. As a replacement for a TEMPEST lab, some vendors have come up with low-radiation
workstations. The cost of such kinds of workstations is more than the normal forensics
workstation.

Module 02 Page 76 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Systems

Fire-suppression systems for forensic lab:

et pipe system: Employsa piping O called as clean agent fire
@ Wet pi Empl iping =F ww Assocalledas cl fi
scheme that maintains a constant € 3 suppression system
water load
‘J Inert gas suppressors: Reduces the
ipe system: Employs a pipin oxygen content to an extent where
@ Drypipe system: Employsapiping SP 7* vg h
scheme that maintains a ¢€ 9 fire cannot be sustained
pressurized air load
‘J Fluorine compound suppressors:
e—

Removes heat faster than it can be
generated during ignition

J Preaction system: Employsa
modified dry pipe scheme. It uses
two triggers to release the liquid
suppressant

we

‘4 Chemical suppression systems:
Deals with fires that occur due to
chemical reactions

im

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproduction isStrictlyProhibited.

Fire can be disastrous in the forensic lab. Any electrical device can be a source of fire, though it
does not generally happen in the computer. On a few occasions, short circuits can also damage
the cable. It might even ignite a flammable item close by.

There may be fire in the computers as well if the servo-voice-coil actuators freeze because of
damage in the drive. The frozen actuators interrupt the movement of the head assembly and
the internal programming of the disk’s circuit forces the movement by applying more power to
the servo-voice-coil actuators. The components of the drive can handle a certain amount of
power before they fail and overload the ribbon connecting the drive to the computer. The
ribbons do not respond to excessive power. High voltage passing through the ribbon causes
Sparks.

For fire suppression systems:

= Install a dry chemical fire extinguisher system to deal with the fire accidents that occur
because of chemical reactions.

=" Check the installation of fire sprinklers and make sure they are working.
= The fire extinguishers must be accessible when needed.

A wet sprinkler system has an overhead sprinkler piping generally concealed above the ceiling.
This system consists of pipes filled with pressurized water and connected to the sprinkler heads,
which infiltrate through the ceiling. Every sprinkler head makes use of the fusible links, which

Module 02 Page 77 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

melt in extreme heat allowing the water to flow. This system fulfills the basic requirements and
is cost effective. In case of fire, it will trigger the sprinklers only in the affected areas.

The interlocked dry pipe systems use water as the extinguishing agent. This system activates
when:

» The temperature rise melts the fusible link on the sprinkler head.

* The electronic detection of fire or smoke opens the sprinkler head valve, allowing water
flow into the system.

This system minimizes the risk of inadvertent discharge of water, but has a reasonable first cost
premium compared to a wet pipe system.

CO2 and FM200 are chemical or gaseous system types that use an electronic fire or smoke
detection technique to release the extinguishing agent. They are more advantageous and
respond rapidly to mitigate a developing fire. These systems require limited cleaning.

Fires in labs produce harmful chemicals, which obstruct the emergency response team.
Therefore, install exhaust systems to remove these toxic products.

The dry chemical type fire extinguisher is currently more popular. It extinguishes Class A, B, or C
fires. Class A refers to paper, trash, and plastic; Class B refers to flammable liquids and gases;
and Class C refers to energized electrical equipment.

Module 02 Page 78 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Recommendations

eS

The containers must be located

Ladera rite! ina restricted area that is only
accessible to lab personnel

The containers used to store
evidence must be secured to
prevent unauthorized access

------4

They should be made of steel
andshould include eitheran
internal cabinet lock or an

external padlock
There must be a limited number

.teleendeeae of duplicate keysso that
authorized access 6 limited

All evidence containers must be
monitored, and they must be = ®-----~ a

locked when notin use
Contents of the container should

be regularly inspected to ensure
that only current evidence is

stored

e-----«

ell

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproduction isStrictlyProhibited.

The evidence lockers are the evidence storage devices and need protection from unauthorized
access by using high-quality padlocks and performing routine inspection to check the content of
the evidence lockers.

Recommendations for securing evidence lockers:
= Place these containers in restricted areas, which are only accessible to lab officers.
» Aminimum number of authorized people should be able to access the evidence.
=" Keep records about the people authorized to access the container.

=" Close all the evidence lockers when not under direct supervision of an authorized
person.

Best practices for using a combination locking system for evidence lockers:
= Provide the same level of security as for the evidence in the container.
# Store the combination in a separate equally secured container.
= Eliminate all the other combinations ever used before setting up a new combination.
# Only authorized personnel should have access to change the lock combinations.

=" Change the combination after every six months or whenever any authorized personne!
leaves the organization.

Module 02 Page 79 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Best practices for using a keyed padlock:

Appoint a person for distributing keys.

Stamp every duplicate key with sequential numbers.

Keep a registry that lists the authorized people for each key.

Perform monthly audits to ensure that no authorized person has lost a key.
When the responsible person changes, maintain a record of all the keys.

Put the keys in a locked container, which is accessible only to the lab manager and key
custodian of the lab.

Maintain the same level of security for keys as for evidence lockers.

Consider changing the locks and keys yearly. If a key is missing, replace all the related
locks and the keys.

Do not maintain a single master key for many locks.

Use evidence lockers made of steel with an external padlock or internal cabinet lock. Acquire a
safe that offers high-level protection of evidence from fire damage. If possible, use safes
designed to protect electronic media. The evidence storage room can also be helpful in a self-
owned computer forensics lab. The evidence room should have the same construction and
security as the lab. This room also requires an evidence custodian and a service counter.
Maintain a log that lists the time of opening and closing an evidence container. Preserve these
logs for at least three years or longer.

Module 02 Page 20 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council

All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

the Security ofa
Forensics Lab

Inspect the lab on a regular basis to check ifthe policies and procedures adopted are followed

Forensics lab should be under surveillance to protect it from intrusions

Some of the steps that must be followed to check for security pollcy compliance:

Manually check the fire extinguishers to ensure they unction

Examine the ceiling, floor, roof, and exterior walls of the lab at least once a month to check
for structural integrity

Examine the doors to ensure they close and lock correctly
Check if the locks are working properly or if they need to be replaced

Examine the log register to make sure all entries are correct and complete

Check the log sheets for evidence containers to check when they have been opened and closed

At the end of the workday, acquire unprocessed evidence and store it in a secure place

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproduction isStrictlyProhibited.

Inspect the lab on a regular basis to check for proper implementation of the designed policies
and procedures. The forensics lab should be under surveillance to protect it from intrusions.

Some of the steps to check for security policy compliance:
=" Check the fire extinguishers manually to ensure their functioning.

=" Examine the ceiling, floor, roof, and exterior walls of the lab at least once a month to
check for structural integrity.

» Examine the doors to ensure they close and lock correctly.
=" Check if the locks are working properly or if they need replacement.
=» Examine the log register to make sure all entries are correct and complete.

=» Check the evidence container log sheets regularly to keep a record of their opening and
closing.

» At the end of the workday, acquire unprocessed evidence and store it in a secure place.

Module 02 Page 21 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Considerations

Key job roles in a forensics laboratory include lab coordinator, lab
director, forensic technician, forensic analyst, and forensic scientist

Estimate the number of personnel required to deal with the case,
based on its nature

Consider skilled personnel and ensure they are certified pertaining
to their job roles

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproduction isStrictlyProhibited.

Human resource refers to the trained professionals required to perform a series of functions for
an organization or firm in order to complete a bigger objective. Every company has a
department of human resource professionals, who are responsible for finding and recruiting
the skilled employees for their company.

In the case of a computer forensics laboratory, key job roles include lab cybercrime
investigator, coordinator, lab director, forensic technician, forensic analyst, forensic scientist,
etc. As part of the human resource consideration, estimate the number of personnel required
to deal with the case based on its nature and the skills they should have to complete the tasks.
Interview the appropriate candidates and recruit them legally. Ensure they have certification
pertaining to their job roles.

Computer Forensics Investigator

Hiring a computer forensics investigator is a vital step in computer forensics. The investigator is
a person who handles the complete investigation process, for example, preservation,
identification, extraction, and documentation of the evidence.

Skills essential for a computer forensics investigator are:

" Knowledge about general computers such as hardware, software, OS, applications,
networking, etc.

=» Experience in performing a proper investigation to protect digital evidence.

= Must have certification from authorized organizations.

Module 02 Page 2 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

For searching and seizing some crime evidence, a search warrant is required. A law
enforcement officer is the person who persuades a judge that issuing a warrant is necessary.
The judge first prepares an affidavit containing the reason for the search and the area of the
search. The affidavit also gives a limited right to the police to violate the suspect’s privacy.

Law Enforcement Officer

The law enforcement officer should have the following essential skills:
» Alawyer and have knowledge of general computer skills
»" Have knowledge of all cybercrime laws

=" Must know the way to write an appropriate warrant for searching and seizing a
computer

Lab Director

The lab director/manager is responsible for adhering to a specific set of industrial standards. A
lab director regularly reviews and manages case-related processes. Apart from regular duties, a
lab director needs to promote group consensus In policy making or decision making,
understand lab needs, ensure that staff members adhere to ethical standards, and plan for
updating the lab.

The prime duty of a lab director is to maintain quality during the entire process of a computer
forensic investigation: outlining the case and the path to follow, evidence logging, lab entry
privileges, guidelines in filing reports, understanding the lab’s status and ensuring its efficiency,
and setting production schedules in the investigation process. The director is responsible for lab
policies, and the safety and security of the evidence and staff. The lab director is also
responsible for day-to-day investigation activities in the lab. Duties even include lab funding
and expenditure management.

A lab director must also:
=" Have a wide range of forensic knowledge
» Anticipate staffing, equipment, and training needs

"= Help ensure compliance with the Quality Assurance (QA) requirements

Module 02 Page 83 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Building a

UY The Computer Forensics approach should be clearly defined before building the forensics
workstation

J The computer forensics workstation should have facilities and tools to:

Support hardware-based

local and remote network
drive duplication

Validate the image and
the file’s integrity

Lean
meio. |

Isolate and analyze free

Identify the deleted files drive space

Copyright O by All Rights Reserved. Reproduction isStrictly Prohibited.

Define the computer forensics approach clearly before building the forensics workstation. For
developing a forensics laboratory, the total estimated cost incurred to meet the accreditation
standards of a standardized body that certifies labs will be the deciding factor for fund
allocation. Funding is important in order for a successful implementation of the computer

forensics lab. Calculate the yearly budget allocation for a forensics lab, based on the previous
year’s statistics as well as estimated trends for the next year. This includes the number of cases
handled, the training required for staff, upgrading hardware and software tools in the lab,
additional equipment required for enhancing the security of the lab premises, renovation of the
lab, recruitment of additional certified personnel if needed, and many other deciding factors.

The computer forensics workstation should have facilities and tools to:
# Support hardware-based local and remote network drive duplication
= Validate the image and the file’s integrity

= Identify the date and time of creation, access and modification of a file

= Identify deleted files
# Support removable media

= Isolate and analyze free drive space

Module 02 Page 24 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Exam 312-49

a Forensics Lab

Monitor,keyboard, and i —)

mouse according to the I
comfort of the investigator =
Minimum of two hard

drives for loading two
different 05s on each

For emergencies, a spare
RAM and hard disk

Hardware requirements fora basic forensic workstation are as follows:

Note: Hardware peripherals must be keptin stock at all times to ensure that an investigator always has the necessary tools

Processor with high computing speed

& GB RAM for satisfying minimum
processing requirements

a PPA, DVD-ROM and Blu-ray with

read/write capabilities

Motherboard that supports IDE,
§CS1, USB, FireWire, slot fora
a LAN/WAN cardand a fanattached
a. for cooling the processor
Tape drive, USB drive,
and removal drive bays

All Rights Reserved. Reproduction isStrictlyProhibited.

Copyright © by

Forensic workstations are high-end computers with fast processing speed, high memory, and
disk storage. These workstations can serve critical processes such as duplication of data,
recovering data from deleted files, analyzing data over the network, and retrieving data from
the slack. These workstations come with forensics tools that help the investigator in an
investigation. The investigation includes various high-end and low-end processes; thus, the
hardware configuration of forensic workstations used for extreme processing will be different
from that of a workstation used for doing routine tasks. The hardware requirements for a basic

forensic workstation are as follows:

#" Processor with high computing speed
=" 8GB RAM for satisfying minimum processing requirements

=» DVD-ROM, Blu-ray with read/write facility

"= Motherboard, which supports IDE, SCSI, USB, slot for LAN/WAN card, and a fan attached

for cooling the processor

#" Tape drive, USB drive, removable drive bays

=" Monitor, keyboard, and mouse according to comfort of investigator

» Aminimum of two hard drives for loading two different operating systems
o The two operating systems should preferably be Windows and Linux

=» Extra RAM and hard disk in case of any need

Module 02 Page 85

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council

All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Build a Computer

a Forensic specialists investigating computer crimes require a set of dedicated tools to identify and
analyze the evidence

a Computer forensics tools can be divided into two types:

Computer Forensics Hardware mp [pe Computer Forensics Software q

Specialized cables Operating Systems

Write-blockers Data discovery tools

Drive duplicators Password-cracking tools

Archive and Restore devices Acquisition tools

Media sterilizationsystems Data analyzers

Other equipment that allows forensics Data recovery tools

software toolsto work

DIIIIIIIIIII

File viewers (Image and Graphics)

File type conversion tools

Security and Utilities software

Forensics lab should have all the necessary tools (hardware and software) in place to help investigators conduct a forensics
investigation quickly and efficiently

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproduction isStrictlyProhibited.

The investigator should have a collection of hardware and software tools for acquiring data
during the investigation. If the investigator is familiar with the investigation toolkit, it can offer
a quick response during the investigation of the incident. A sophisticated investigation toolkit
can reduce the incident impact by stopping the incident from spreading through the systems.

This will minimize the organization’s damage and aid the investigation process as well.
A computer investigation toolkit contains:

= A laptop computer with relevant software tools

=" Operating systems and patches

*" Application media

*" Write-protected backup devices

» Blank media

» Basic networking equipment and cables

Create the toolkit before commencing an investigation, as the investigating team needs to be
familiar with these tools before performing the investigation.

Module 02 Page 26 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Paraben's First Responder

Digital Intelligence Forensic

DeepSpar Disk Imager

Bundle Hardware: FRED
Paraben's First Responder Kits DeepSpar Disk |mager is a disk FRED systems are optimized
allow firstresponders to imaging system specifically for stationary laboratory
preserve various types of built to handle damaged drives acquisition and analysis

mobile evidence and protect
it from unwanted signals and
loss of power

Attps: www. poraben.cam http://www. deepsper.cam https: www. digitalinteligence.cam

All Rights Reserved. Reproduction isStrictly Prohibited.

Copyright © by

Paraben's First Responder Bundle

Source: https://www.paraben.com

Paraben's First Responder Kits provide first responders the necessary tools to preserve various
types of mobile evidence and protect it from unwanted signals and loss of power. Whenever
there is a mobile device involved at an incident, there are recommended procedures to follow.
Two of the most important steps are to secure the device from unwanted wireless signals that
could contaminate or eliminate data and to provide power to the device to prevent losing data.
Paraben's Mobile First Responder Bundle provides for both of these steps.

DeepSpar Disk Imager

Source: http://www.deepspar.com

= DeepSpar Recovery Environment is a free Windows-based application extending File
System Recovery capabilities of the DeepSpar Disk Imager.

= DeepSpar Operations Server is a client communication system that professionalizes your
business and the interactions with your clients.

= Forensics Add-on for DeepSpar Disk Imager provides computer forensics capabilities.

Digital Intelligence Forensic Hardware: FRED

Source: https://www. digitalintelligence.com

FRED systems are optimized for stationary laboratory acquisition and analysis. Simply remove
the hard drive(s) from the suspect system, plug them into FRED, and acquire the digital
evidence. FRED will acquire data directly from IDE/EIDE/ATA/SATA/ATAPI/SAS/Firewire/USB
hard drives and storage devices and save forensic images to Blu-Ray, DVD, CD, or hard drives.

Module 02 Page 87 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Forensics (Cont’d)
UltraBay 3d ROADMASSTER-3 X2
Attps:// www. digita intelligence. com http: //ics-ig.com

1 il
Parahen's StrompHokdl = IMAGE MASSTER WIPEPRO
Faraday Bags http://ics-iq.cam
Attps :// www. poreaben.com
PC-3000 Data Extractor PC-3000 Flash
Attp:/ www deeps por.com http://www. dee psper.com

=

Paraben’s Chat Stick ¢ heey ZX-Tower
RAPID IMAGE 7020 X2 IT < WriteProtect-DESKTOP
Atty: fics-ig.com WT = http://www. logicube.com

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproduction isStrictlyProhibited.

UltraBay 3d

Source: https://www.digitalintelligence.com

The UltraBay 3d is a USB 3.0 integrated forensic bridge that includes a touch screen display and
a graphical user interface for acquisition process monitoring.

Paraben's StrongHold Faraday Bags
Source: httos://www.paraben.com

Paraben's StrongHold bags block out wireless signals from cell towers, wireless networks, and
other signal sources to protect evidence.

PC-3000 Data Extractor

Source: http://www.deepspar.com

PC-3000 Data Extractor is a software add-on to PC-3000 that diagnoses and fixes file system
issues, so that the client's data can be obtained. It works in tandem with the PC-3000 hardware
to recover data from any media (IDE HDD, SCSI HDD, and flash memory readers).

Paraben’s Chat Stick

Source: Attos://www.paraben.com

Paraben's Chat Stick is a thumb drive device that will search the entire computer, scan it for
chat logs from Yahoo, MSN 6.1, 6.2, 7.0, & 7.5, ICQ 1999-2003b, Trillian, Skype, Hello, and

Module 02 Page #8 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Miranda and create a report in an easy to read format so that one can see what kids or
employees are saying to people online.

RAPID IMAGE 7020 X2 IT

Source: http://ics-ig.com

The Rapid Image™ Hard Drive Duplicators are designed to copy one "Master" hard drive to up
to 19 "Target" hard drives at Fast SATA-II| Speeds. It can also be configured to copy multiple
Master drives simultaneously. It also supports the duplication of up to 10 Master drives
simultaneously.

ROADMASSTER-3 X2

Source: http://ics-ig.com

The RoadMASSter-3 X2 is a forensic portable lab designed as a forensic data acquisition and
analysis workstation. The RoadMASSter-3 X2 is rugged and is equipped with all the necessary
tools to seize data from drives with common drive interface technologies.

IMAGE MASSTER WIPEPRO

Source: Attp://ics-ig.com

The Image MASSter™ Wipe PRO is a hard Drive Sanitization Station. It can erase up to 8 Hard
Drives simultaneously at soeeds exceeding 7 GB/min.

PC-3000 Flash

Source: http://www.deepspar.com

PC-3000 Flash is a hardware and software suite for recovering data from flash-based storage
devices like SD cards and USB Sticks.

ZX-Tower

Source: http://www. logicube.com

The ZX-Tower™ solution provides secure sanitization of hard disk drives and delivers wiping at a
speed of 24 GB/min. The multi-target ZX-T allows to easily wipe up to 8 target hard drives
simultaneously and also allows users to wipe up to 4 USB 3.0 enclosures.

WriteProtect-DESKTOP

Source: http://www.logicube.com

The WriteProtect-DESKTOP provides digital forensic professionals with a secure, read-only
write-blocking of suspect hard drives. It is a portable write-blocker that provides support for 5
different interfaces in one device.

Module 02 Page 29 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Forensics (Cont’d)

FE
|
|
| &
| &

Data Recovery Stick FRED (MicroFRED)

Attps:/// www. poraben.com ittp:// www. digitolinteligence .com
kore T8-R2 Forensic USB FREDC

Attps :/(/waw2. guidancesoftwore.com retpih , inteligence.com
Tableau TP3 Power Supply

Attps:// www. guidancesaftwore.cam Attps:/ /wwe.cru-inc.com

FRED DX (Dual Xeon) HotPlug Field Kit

D | ED | RE | |e

Attps:// www. digita linteligence. com Attp:///wew. prosifier.com
VOOM Hardcopy 3P Shadow 3
Atto:/www.voomtech.com http://www. voomtech.cam

Drive eRazer Ultra |

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproduction isStrictlyProhibited.

Data Recovery Stick

Source: https://www.paraben.com

The Data Recovery Stick can recover deleted files. There's no software to download and install
it, just plug the Data Recovery Stick into a USB port, open the software, and start recovery. Even
if files have been deleted from the recycle bin, they can be still recovered as long as they have
not been overwritten by new data.

Tableau T8-R2 Forensic USB Bridge

Source: https://www2.quidancesoftware.com

Tableau's new T8-R2 Forensic USB Bridge offers secure, hardware-based write blocking of USB
mass storage devices.

Tableau TP3 Power Supply

Source: https://www2.quidancesoftware.com

The TP3 is designed to power the Tableau TD1 duplicator and two hard disks.
FRED DX (Dual Xeon)

Source: Attps://www.digitalintelligence.com

FRED DX (Dual Xeon) is FRED SR's Dual Xeon configuration in a standard FRED chassis. It is used
when the power that FRED SR offers in a full-tower footprint is required.

Module 02 Page $0 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

VOOM Hardcopy 3P

Source: http://www. voomtech.com

It is a forensic SATA/IDE Hard Drive Imager, Cloner, and Wiper with NIST approved SHA256 built
into the hardware

FRED (MicroFRED)

Source: http://www .digitalintelliqence.com

FRED (MicroFRED) is a micro Forensic Recovery of Evidence Device. The LFRED system has
much of the processing power of a full size FRED system but in a package only a fraction of the
size (9" x 8" x13").

FREDC

Source: http://www. digitalintelligence.com

The FREDC is a fully configured, private cloud, for Forensic Storage. Centralized Storage,
centralized administration, centralized security, and centralized backup

Drive eRazer Ultra

Source: hAttps://www.cru-inc.com

The CRU® WiebeTech® Drive eRazer™ Ultra is a device that can completely clean hard drives.
Simply connect a drive to the Drive eRazer Ultra and it will sanitize the drive and without tying
up the computer.

HotPlug Field Kit

Source: http://www.proxifier.com

With the CRU® WiebeTech® HotPlug™ one can transport a computer without shutting it down.
The HotPlug allows seizure and removal of computers from the field to anywhere else.

Shadow 3

Source: http://www. voomtech.com

It helps to view suspect computers at the scene of the investigation in real time without prior
need to image hard drives and without the need for clumsy virtual viewing software; all without
corrupting the evidence.

Module 02 Page 91 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Exam 312-49

Password Cracking Tool: Cain & Abel Capsa Network Analyzer
a: | =o (gh 22a) AST aaa an Ge epetens =
fia Few Confgem Took Help fe an —s — laced
a ee a
aeocme|ty)s Limms sess) +f eres AAR:
iat | Hart en = =a lop =n } a | Lal
[i Decodum [QF ena [lp rater [igh Concews [QQ trecovsee POR ctu ['y? ween [By my) - ace so SS
Foesade ~ | Forerrierny [#10 weever Chert [Mneeeee Ppa esis Eicon “ape | Peppa Cerneens | F comernecen [ TOP Coceneeen [i Cemcereeee’ Mewia_ [Fate [ariel 1 F |g
meee: 1h Veale meat Lhas Ca | | a | i ieee = S-o £- | ae had Ez
Sano mat (Lasteaineeeml-....- . — ———M,
Sl ane ey een . Le i |
Ga Low 2S rcuim: | ae
Prors I |
ee] = — tt
GE leit J i s
Siren
ae TOG . ae Pardon Recunee - oO x
fy Tre
SMTP i
Fp ‘ Ls RR@CUVALcom v1.55. (088. Yih
DCLANPC (Ol ys) Mcrosett Wines L0Pra Cte
Tesh: Bees ae Date Cre SP i 1 , 8. a Te HO Geaohecs
eae
< SL Ai Lowa Desks we) som fw) [og ongit el pe Optom...
ope .
en ' Ei) Filename: Paths =) Parr inf Hewder
Boer CASReepele Bins: 15.2002
ae ~ [Sy Fre fe Siewichies Ci Recycle Bist
SRODWDAE jpg CASReqleBWiS-1-21-
Hots [iy Ae TE Rvteny [Ph Points [is oe ] fl WB sRiwHazeipg C2SRecyle Bini 1-521
Lone pacbete: i Fl sRaeeicion Ch Recyclesini5-1--21-2
Fl WP SPUACGP jpg CASRecyele Bini $15.28.
tips WWW. Oxo Fl Ge SRT20F SH Jpg CrulRenece tins 121-2 http://www.colgsoft.com
Fe] WSR psy CASRecpele Biv Ife 2be et
1 i SLAB jpg ChdRecycte Bits 1-S31-B
Fl scoring ChSReqdesWiS- 121-2
fA WSITZAFtHipg CAhSRecyela din S- 1.00.2
Fl warn jpg Cri Recycles ii5-1--21-#
FA A id tee CAS Reels Ais 1
= *
Poured 17 ede] (379, 188 ignored) in 21.32 eerors.
(Qo ely https i/www. pirform.com chegcie ucptes.

Data Recovery Tool: Recuva

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproduction isStrictlyProhibited.

Password Cracking Tool: Cain & Abel

Source: http://www. oxid.it

Cain & Abel is a password recovery tool for Microsoft Operating Systems. It allows recovery of
various kinds of passwords by sniffing the network, cracking encrypted passwords using
Dictionary, Brute-Force, and Cryptanalysis attacks, recording VoIP conversations, decoding
scrambled passwords, recovering wireless network keys, revealing password boxes, uncovering
cached passwords, and analyzing routing protocols.

Data Recovery Tool: Recuva

Source: https://www. piriform.com

Recuva can recover lost pictures, music, documents, videos, emails or any other file type and it
can also recover data from any rewriteable media like memory cards, external hard drives, USB

sticks, etc.

Module 02 Page 92

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Network Traffic Analysis Tool: Capsa Network Analyzer

Source: http://www.colasoft.com

Capsa Free is a network analyzer that allows monitoring of network traffic, troubleshooting
network issues, and analyzing packets. Features include support for over 300 network protocols
(including the ability to create and customize protocols), MSN, and Yahoo Messenger filters,
email monitor and auto-save, and customizable reports and dashboards.

Features:
# Extended network security analysis
= Versatile traffic & bandwidth statistics
» Advanced network protocol analysis
*# Multiple network behavior monitoring

» Automatic expert network diagnosis

Module 02 Page 93 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Forensics (Cont’d) “C(HFL

File Viewing Software: File Viewer File Type Conversion Software: FileMerlin

For quick help with ary ilem, Purchone deat
| ar | sleds oath = |

SOURCE he

| Jc:\wisers wecmin'ides ktop'ibest file. dock

MS Word 200?

+ i Pernt Ba ~ 1s ablation DARE preg ~ KE er iar Geadbtiege borane + DB =
SB epee Geer Eh Ea ie re ote Utne ick ber
(ee a Fa +4 EWES) GE)

Fakes - © Sian

http://www w.goce ssorywaore.com Atto:/ www. file-convert.caom

fee Attos//www.orive-imoge.com = eat Hele

y Tool: R-Drive

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproduction isStrictlyProhibited.

File Viewing Software: File Viewer

Source: http://www.accessoryware.com

File Viewer is a Disk/File Utility that helps to locate, view, print, organize, and exchange files
over the internet using e-mail components. It can search for many common file types, or groups
of file types, display, print, organize or send files over the internet, find and display pictures,
videos, sounds, music, text files, documents, spread sheets, database, and system files, locally
over the LAN or on the internet. Picture file types supported by the file viewer are JPG,
JPG2000, GIF, uncompressed TIF, TIFF, BMP, ICO, CUR, PCX, DCX, PCD, FPX, WMF, EMF, FAX,
RAW, XPB, XPM, IFF, PBM, CUT, PSD, PNG, TGA, EPS, RAS, WPG, PCT, PCX, CLP, XWD, FLC, ANI,
SGI, XBM, etc.

Imaging Tool: R-Drive Image

Source: http://www.drive-image.com

R-Drive Image is a potent utility that provides creation of disk image files for backup or
duplication purposes. R-Drive Image restores the images on the original disks, on any other
partitions, or even on a hard drive's free space. Using R-Drive Image, one can restore the
system after heavy data loss caused by an operating system crash, virus attack, or hardware
failure.

Features:
= Asimple wizard interface

Module 02 Page 94 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

» |mage file compression

»" Removable media support
» Image files splitting

=» |mage Protection

File Type Conversion Software: File Viewer

Source: http://www.file-convert.com

FleMerlin converts word processing, spreadsheet, presentation and database files between a
wide range of file formats. Widely regarded as the premier document conversion product, It is
suitable for straightforward as well as complex documents, and is the most accurate, complete
and flexible such solution that we know of.

Module 02 Page 95 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49

Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Forensics

OSForensics
http://www. osforensics.com

AccessData’s FTK
Attp://occessdote.com

Guidance Software’s EnCase Hex Editor Neo

Attps://www. guidancesoftware.com

Bulk extractor

Suite http://www. forensicswikiorg

Attp: (www. nuikx.com

PALADIN Forensic Suite

Xplico
http://www. splico.arg

The Sleuth Kit
http://www. sleuthkit.org

mailXaminer

Nuix Corporate Investigation |
Attps:4/www.molleam iner.com |

Copyright © by _ All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

AccessData’s FTK

Source: http://accessdata.com

FTK is a court-cited digital investigations platform. It provides processing and indexing up front,
so filtering and searching is fast. FTK can be setup for distributed processing and incorporate
web-based case management and collaborative analysis.

Guidance Software’s EnCase

Source: https://www. quidancesoftware.com

= Rapidly acquire data from the widest variety of devices
» Unearth potential evidence with disk-level forensic analysis
= Produce comprehensive reports on your findings

=" Maintain the integrity of your evidence in a format the courts have come to trust

Nuix Corporate Investigation Suite

Source: Attp://www.nuix.com

The Nuix Corporate Investigation Suite is used to collect, process, analyze, review, and report
on electronic evidence.

Module 02 Page 96 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

PALADIN Forensic Suite

Source: https://www.sumuri.com

PALADIN is a modified “live” Linux distribution based on Ubuntu used to fulfill various forensics
tasks in a forensically sound manner via the PALADIN Toolbox. PALADIN is available in 64-bit
and 32-bit versions.

mailXaminer

Source: https://www. mailxaminer.com

It is used to search and uncover relevant information by conducting, coordinating, and real-
time monitoring of a case with an investigative team to get thorough and unambiguous
evidence in a court admissible file format.

OSForensics

Source: http://www. osforensics.com

Extract forensic data from computers, and uncover the data hidden inside a PC.

Hex Editor Neo

Source: http://www. hhdsoftware.com

Freeware Hex Editor Neo allows viewing, modifying, analyzing hexadecimal data and binary
files, editing, exchanging data with other applications through the clipboard, inserting new data
and deleting existing data, as well as performing other editing actions.

Bulk extractor

Source: http://www.forensicswiki.org

The bulk extractor is a computer forensics tool that scans a disk image, a file or a directory of
files and extracts useful information without parsing the file system or file system structures.

Xplico

Source: http://www.xplico.org

The goal of Xplico is to extract the applications data contained from an Internet traffic capture.
For example, from a pcap file Xplico extracts each email (POP, IMAP, and SMTP protocols), all
HTTP contents, each VoIP call (SIP), FTP, TFTP, and so on. Xplico is an open source Network
Forensic Analysis Tool (NFAT).

The Sleuth Kit

Source: http://www. sleuthkit.org

The Sleuth Kit® is a collection of command line tools and a C library that allows you to analyze
disk images and recover files from them.

Module 02 Page 97 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Forensics (Cont’d)

| Bg
| &
a
| 2
| &

Auto psy
Acco: (waawsleuthkit. org

Ophcrack
http://opherack.sourceforge.net

. . Paraben’s P2C (P2
Oxygen Forensic® Kit (

s/w forens Commander)
rete ~_ ‘ecom https: / www. poraben.com
Paraben’s DP2C
Attps:///waww.poraben.com http://www irffonview.com

MiniTool Power Data

1) | FES | fib |

Recovery Enterprise SnowBatch
hetp://www.minitool.cam http://www snowbound.com
LOphtCrack MN m" Zamzar

teten/ kom La http:///www.zomzor.cam

IrfanView |

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproduction isStrictly Prohibited.

Autopsy

Source: http://www.sleuthkit.org

Autopsy® is a digital forensics platform and graphical interface to The Sleuth Kit® and other
digital forensics tools. It is used by law enforcement, military, and corporate examiners to
investigate the happenings on a computer. It can even be used to recover photos from a
camera's memory card.

Oxygen Forensic® Kit

Source: http://www.oxygen-forensic.com

The Oxygen Forensic® Kit is a ready-to-use and customizable mobile forensic solution for field
and in-lab usage. It allows not only extraction of data from the device but also creates reports
and analyzes data in the field.

Paraben’s DP2C

Source: https://www.paraben.com

DP2C is a data targeted collection tool for triage forensics. DP2C is special software that runs
from a USB drive and allows the collection of specific type of data from Windows-based
systems to the evidence drive.

Module 02 Page 98 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

MiniTool Power Data Recovery Enterprise

Source: http://www. minitool.com

MiniTool Power Data Recovery Enterprise Edition can recover data including images, texts,
videos, music, and emails. It supports different data loss situations like important data lost
because of deletion by mistake, formatting, logical damage, etc.

LOphtCrack

Source: http://www./Ophtcrack.com

LOphtCrack is a password auditing and recovery software. It is packed with features such as
scheduling, hash extraction from 64 bit Windows versions, multiprocessor algorithms, and
network monitoring and decoding.

Ophcrack
Source: http://ophcrack.sourceforge.net

Ophcrack is a free Windows password cracker based on rainbow tables. It comes with a
Graphical User Interface and runs on multiple platforms.

Paraben’s P2C (P2 Commander)

Source: https://www.paraben.com

P2C is a digital investigation tool used by forensic examiners. It has an integrated database with
multi-threading. P2C was built on Paraben’'s trusted email examination tools for unparalleled
network email and personal email archive analysis.

IrfanView

Source: http://www. irfanview.com

IrfanView is a small FREEWARE (for non-commercial use) graphic viewer for Windows 9x, ME,
NT, 2000, XP, 2003 , 2008, Vista, Windows 7, Windows 8, Windows 10.

SnowBatch

Source: http://www.snowbound.com

SnowBatch® is a Windows-based image conversion and file conversion application that converts
large batches of image or document files from one format to another.

Zamzar

Source: http://www.zamzar.com

Zamzar supports over 1200 different conversions such as Video Converter, Audio Converter,
Music Converter, eBook Converter, Image Converter, and CAD Converter.

Module 02 Page 99 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Exam 312-49

s
S
&
&

Keep the team small to protect the confidentiality of the investigation and to guard against Information leaks
Identify team members and assign a responsibility to each team member
Ensure that every team member has the necessary clearance and authorization to conduct assigned tasks

Assign one team member as the technical lead for the investigation

Photographer
Incident Responder

Decision Maker
Incident Analyzer

Evidence
Examiner/Investigator

Evidence Documenter

Evidence Manager
Evidence Witness

Attorney

People Involved in an Investigation Team

Photographs the crime scene and the evidence gathered

Responsible for the measures to be taken whenan incident occurs
Responsible for authorization of a policy or procedure forthe investigation process

Analyzes the incidents based on their occurrence

Examines the evidence acquired and sorts the useful evidence

Documents all the evidence and the phases presentin the investigation process

Manages the evidence in such a way that it is admissiblein the court of law

Offers a formal opinion in the form of atestimonyin the courtof law

Gives legal advice

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproduction isStrictlyProhibited.

The investigation team plays a major role in solving a case. The team is responsible for
evaluating the crime, evidence, and criminals. Every team member should be assigned a few
specific tasks (roles and responsibilities) that let the team analyze the incident easily. The
guidelines for building the investigation team are as follows:

» Determine the person who has to respond to an incident so that a proper internal
computer investigation can be performed

= Organize the team members and give responsibility to each member of team

= Appoint a person as a technical lead for the investigation

= The investigation team has to be as small as possible to achieve confidentiality and

avoid information leaks

» Provide each team member with the necessary clearance and authorization to complete
assigned tasks

» Enlist help from a trusted external investigation team, if required

Computer forensics is the branch of forensic science that deals with criminal offences
performed using technical devices such as computer or any digital media devices. The evidence
for such cases is present on digital storage media such as CDs/DVDs, Blu-ray discs, USBs, mobile

phones, BlackBerrys, iPods, etc.

Module 02 Page 100

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

To find the appropriate evidence on these digital devices, the following people may be
involved:

Attorney: Helps in giving legal advice about how to carry out the investigation, and the
legal issues involved in the forensics investigation process.

Photographer: Photographs the crime scene and the evidence gathered. He or she
should have an authentic certification. This person is responsible for shooting all the
evidence found at the crime scene, which records the key evidence in the forensics
process.

Incident Responder: Responsible for the measures taken when an incident occurs. The
incident responder is responsible for securing the incident area and collecting the
evidence that is present at the crime scene. He or she should disconnect the system
from other systems to stop the spread of an incident from one system to another.

Decision Maker: The person responsible for authorization of a policy or procedure
during the investigative process. Based on the incident type, makes a decision about the
policies and procedures necessary to handle the Incident.

Incident Analyzer: Analyzes the incidents based on their occurrence. He or she
examines the incident with regard to its type, how it affects the systems, different
threats and vulnerabilities associated with It, etc.

Evidence Examiner/Investigator: Examines the evidence acquired and sorts the useful
evidence. Examines and sorts the evidence according to its relevancy to the case.
Maintains an evidence hierarchy with the most important evidence given a high priority
and the evidence with less importance has a lower priority.

Evidence Documenter: Documents all the evidence and the phases present in the
investigation process. The evidence documenter gathers information from all the people
involved in the forensics process and documents It in an orderly fashion, from incident
occurrence to the end of the investigation. The documents should contain complete
information about the forensics process.

Evidence Manager: Manages the evidence. The evidence manager has all the
information about the evidence, for example, evidence name, evidence type, time,
source of evidence, etc. He or she manages and maintains a record of the evidence such
that it is admissible in the court of law.

Expert Witness: Offers a formal opinion as a testimony in a court of law. Expert
witnesses help to authenticate the facts and witnesses during any complex case. Expert
witnesses also assist in cross-examining witnesses and evidence, as various factors may
influence a normal witness.

Module 02 Page 101 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council

All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Forensic Practitioner
and C HFI

In the field of computer forensics, digital evidence plays a vital role to track the perpetrator. The evidence must not

be tampered in any way from start to the end point of a forensics investigation process, in order for it to be
admissible in the court of law

The overall success of a computer forensics laboratory mainly relies on experience gathering, knowledge sharing,
Ongoing education, and investment in human resources development

To carry out the investigation process in a forensically sound manner, forensic practitioners need:

& Many states and locallaw enforcement

& Mostof the computer forensics
agencies require forensic practitioners to be

laboratories expect job candidates holding a :
degree or certificate in the field of forensics licensed in accordance with the state's

science and crime scene investigations licensing standards
@ Having a certificate in the fied of forensics & hb es license, oa practitioners rie
investigation validates both the extent of review the state’s licensing board regulations

knowledge and the hands-on proficiency & Some states do not have specific licensing
of an individual regulations, but have a legal code of ethics
set as criteria for forensics investigation

& Also, itis important for an individual to
maintain their certification by staying & In this case, a forensic practitioner mustknow
up-to-date in the field of forensics science what code of ethics is followed in a state or
and routine retesting states where he/she practices or testifies

Copyright O by All Rights Reserved. Reproduction isStrictly Prohibited.

In the field of computer forensics, digital evidence plays a vital role in tracking the perpetrator.
Evidence tampered in any way from start to end of the forensic investigation process is not
admissible in a court of law. The overall success of a computer forensic laboratory mainly relies
on experience gathering, knowledge sharing, ongoing education, and investment in human

resources development.

To conduct computer forensic investigations that are legally sound, it is necessary to employ
skillful, experienced, licensed, and certified investigators. The experience and skills will help the
investigator to solve the case easily, accurately, and in lesser time.

To perform the investigation in a forensically sound manner, forensic practitioners must go
through:

Certification:

Most of the computer forensic laboratories expect job candidates possessing a higher degree
and a certification in the field of forensic science and crime scene investigations, as these will
make the investigation trustworthy and accurate. Having a certificate in the field of forensic
investigation validates both the extent of knowledge and the hands-on proficiency of an
individual. The investigators have to annually improve their skills and undergo training to be up-
to-date with the new technologies in the field of forensic science and routine retesting.

Module 02 Page 102 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Licensing:

Many states and local law enforcement require forensic practitioners or computer forensics
investigators to have licenses in accordance with the state’s licensing standards. To obtain a
license, the forensic practitioner must abide by the state’s licensing board regulations and pass
the regulatory examination or tests. Hiring a licensed investigator will increase the reputation
and trustworthiness of a company as well as improve the firm’s reliability to provide testimony
in court.

Some states do not have specific licensing regulations, but have a set of legal code of ethics as
criteria for forensic investigation. In this case, forensic practitioners must know what code of
ethics the states follow where they practice or testify.

Module 02 Page 103 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

wa-

Determine the extent of
authority to search

It is essential to understand the
laws that apply to the
investigation, including the
internal organization policies
beforestarting the investigation
process

= &

identify possible concerns
related to applicable Federal
statutes suchas the Electronic
Com munications Privacy Act of
1986 (ECPA) andthe Cable

Com munications Policy Act
(CCPA), bothas amended by the

& Determine the legal
authorities for conducting
an investigation

& Consult with a legal advisor
about the issues that

USA PATRIOT ACT of 2001 maybe rai
and/orthe Privacy Protection ‘ caren perl
Actof 1980 (PPA), State statutes, °

evidence
and local policies and laws

© Ensure the customer's
privacy and confidentiality

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproduction isStrictly Prohibited.

It is essential to be aware of the laws that will be applicable to the investigation, including the
organization’s internal policies, before starting the investigation process.

Identify possible concerns related to applicable federal statutes, state statutes, and local
policies and laws. Applicable federal statutes include the Electronic Communications Privacy Act
of 1986 (ECPA) and the Cable Communications Policy Act (CCPA), both as amended by the USA
PATRIOT ACT of 2001, and/or the Privacy Protection Act of 1980 (PPA).

The best practices in reviewing policies and laws include:

Determine the extent of the authority to search: As the incident can relate to any
confidential information, it is necessary to determine the limits/extent of the authority
to search for evidence by an investigation team.

Determine the legal authorities that perform an investigation: Establishing policies and
procedures that address the privacy rights of the employees, contractors, or any other
personnel for determining the legal authorities is necessary.

Consult with a legal advisor for the issues arising because of any improper handling of
the investigation: Not all the actions performed during the investigation may be
appropriate. Sometimes the handling of evidence is improper. In this situation, it Is
essential to consult a legal advisor.

Ensure the customer’s privacy and confidentiality: Organizations need to check or
develop policies that ensure the customer's privacy and confidentiality.

Module 02 Page 104 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council

All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Given below are some of the forensics laws and rules specific to The United
States of America:

18 USC §1029 - Fraud and related activity in connection with access devices
18 USC §1030 - Fraud and related activity in connection with computers

18 USC §1361-2 - Prohibits malicious mischief

Rule 402 - General Admissibility of Relevant Evidence

Rule 901 - Authenticating or Identifying Evidence

Rule 608 - Evidence of character and conduct of witness

Rule 502 - Attorney-Client privilege and work product; Limitations on waiver
Rule 614 - Calling and interrogation of witnesses by court

Rule 701 - Opinion testimony by lay witnesses

Rule 705 - Disclosure of facts or data underlying expert opinion

|
=
|
8
8
|
@ Rule 609 - Impeachment by evidence ofa criminal conviction
|
|
|
=
@ Rule 1002 - Requirement of original

=

Rule 1003 - Admissibility of duplicates

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproduction isStrictlyProhibited.

Module 02 Page 105 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

An investigatorimplements various tools and techniques to retrieve and analyze
data of evidentiary value. However, the standalone procedure he/she follows may
affect the resultant evidence and the case outcome.

Thus, there is a need for a forensics unit to establish and follow a well-documented
systematic process for investigatinga case that ensures quality assurance

Followinga systematic process also works as a proof of the fact that the best
practices and procedures involved in it are followed, leading to a reliable result

Copyright O by All Rights Reserved. Reproduction isStrictly Prohibited.

An investigator implements various tools and techniques to retrieve and analyze data of
evidentiary value. However, the standalone procedures may affect the resultant evidence and
the case outcome. Thus, there is a need for the forensic unit to establish and follow a well-
documented systematic process for investigating a case that ensures quality assurance.

Computer forensics investigation can be effective only when the investigators follow certain
standard quality assurance procedures. Frame a standard policy for forensics investigation and
strictly implement it before starting the case analysis. With the quality assurance policies in
place, the investigators can obtain accurate analysis results and help in solving the case.
Therefore, the computer forensics departments must formulate a systematic quality
management system to ensure accurate analysis results.

Following a systematic process also acts as a proof that the investigation firm follows best
practices and procedures leading to a reliable result. Addressing the following topics and

reporting it in a Quality Assurance Manual can demonstrate that Quality Assurance Practices
are in place.

Module 02 Page 106 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Digital Forensics

Quality assurance practices play a vital role in ensuring the overall quality of services that a forensics unit offers

( Tools meant forthe forensics examination process © The final computer forensics reports must be = :
‘must undergo validity testing to check its purpose of technically reviewed by another forensic exam re
design and accuracy of results. Also, the test prior to publishing, to ensure:

conducted must be documented in detail to enable am
= reproduction of the results iO The reportis concise, clear, and understandable ©

tat

=|

tl

Cc | The forensics unit must review and update its quality UY The tools and techniques used in the process a

‘Management system at least once in 3 years to ensure were sufficiently documented and forensically :
_ thatthe system meets the quality reeds ofthe unit sound =

arle

The technical report, accompanying the
executive summary report, should contain in-
depth details of the complete investigation

process so that another investigation ofthe
evidence leads to the same result

Hid

yh

de 4

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproduction isStrictly Prohibited.

Quality assurance practices play a vital role in ensuring the overall quality of services that a
forensic unit offers.

Some of the quality assurance practices:

Tools meant for the forensic examination process must undergo validity testing to check
its purpose of design and accuracy of results. In addition, the test conducted must be
documented in detail to enable reproduction of the results.

The forensic unit must review and update its quality management system at least once
in 3 years to ensure that the system meets the quality needs of the unit.

The forensic laboratory unit must have a documented Quality Assurance Manual (QAM)
and a Quality Manager (QM), who is responsible for all the quality assurance related
issues and developments.

Investigative reports must undergo administrative review for consistency with forensic
unit policies and for report accuracy.

The final computer forensic reports must be technically reviewed by another forensic
examiner prior to publishing, to ensure that:

o The report is concise, clear, and understandable.

o The tools and techniques used in the process were sufficiently documented and
forensically sound.

Module 02 Page 107 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council

All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

o The technical report, accompanying the executive summary report, should contain
in-depth details of the complete investigation process so that another investigation
of the evidence leads to the same result.

Module 02 Page 108 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Exam 312-49

Digital Forensic Process

in the

Conduct formal, documented trainings

ees

Annual proficiency test for investigators

EE

Follow appropriate standards and/or
controls in casework

ll

Have policies and procedures in place for
effective forensics investigation process

ll

Validation of equipment and documentation

ee

2

Copyright © by

Attain ASCLD/LAB accreditation
and/or ISO/IEC 17025 accreditation

Perform quality audits and quality
management system review

ieee

Ensure physical plant security

Assure health and safety
=

Review, update, and document policy and
standards annually

aa

All Rights Reserved. Reproduction isStrictlyProhibited.

Module 02 Page 109

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council

All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics nvestigation Process

Quality Assurance Practices:

Tools, be it hardware or software, require
testing to check if they meet the purpose of
design

Each and every hardware or software tool
must be validated prior to using them on an
actual case. A tool is said to be validated if it

works correctly, is trustworthy, and yields
precise results

All the software tools (ranging from operating
systems to applications) in the forensics
laboratory must possess a license at all times

Updating tools to their latest version, testing
them for functionality, and validating which is
a mandatory, and should be an ongoing,
process

Hardware instruments must be in a working
condition and should be properly maintained

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproduction isStrictlyProhibited.

Quality assurance also includes the practice of checking, repairing and maintaining the
resources required to perform the assigned task. In case of forensics investigation, these

resources include the software and hardware tools used during the investigation process. The
practice that ensures the best outcome from such resources includes:

Tools, be it a hardware or software require testing to check if they meet the purpose of
design

Validate every hardware or software tool prior to using them on an actual case to
ensure if it works correctly, is trustworthy, and yields precise results

All the software tools (ranging from the operating systems to applications) in the
forensic laboratory must have licensed versions and be legal to use

Updating tools to their latest version, testing them for functionality, and validating is
mandatory and should be an ongoing process

Hardware instruments must be in a working condition and maintained properly

Investigators need to document the test methodology, results, and theory about the
test design while testing the tools

Integrate maintaining, auditing, documenting, and demonstrating license compliance
into the laboratory standard operating procedure (SOP)

Tool testing procedures must follow certain standards and policies

Module 02 Page 110 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council

All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

= NIST has launched the Computer Forensic Tool Testing Project (CFTT), which establishes
a “methodology for testing computer forensic software tools by development of general
tool specifications, test procedures, test criteria, test sets, and test hardware.”

Module 02 Page 111 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

_ Laboratory

It is of utmost importance for a forensics lab to be recognized by accredited certification bodies

ISO/IEC 17025 Accreditation ASCLD/LAB Accreditation
& A forensics laboratory could and should pursue & The American Society of Crime Laboratory Directors/LAB
ISO accreditation tobe strictly competent (ASCLD/'LAB) is aninternational body that certifies

forensics labs (not limited to digital forensics)

ASCLD/LAB recommends a certification track for digital
forensics that integrates both $0 standard 17025 and a

supplemental ASCLO requirement set explicit to
laboratory operations

S This standard was issued in 1999 by the
International Organization for Standardization.
This standard has five components: scope,
normative references, terms and definitions,

management requirements, and technical
requirements A crime laboratory can voluntarily approach the Crime

Laboratory Accreditation Program of the ASCLD/LABto

& Management and technical requirements are prove that its management, operations, personnel,

considered as the important elements of ISO/IEC procedures, instruments, physical plant security and

17025 personnel safety procedures are up to the required
© Tocomply with quality assurance and obtain valid standards

results, laboratories need to follow this standard A laboratory with this accreditation ensures quality

assurance. In addition, proficiency testing and training
laboratory personnel canrender better services to the
case investigation

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproduction isStrictly Prohibited.

ISO/IEC 17025 Accreditation:

ISO (the International Organization for Standardization) and IEC (the International Electro-
technical Commission) are part of the specialized system for worldwide standardization. They
develop International Standards in association with technical committees established by the
respective organization for particular fields of technical activity.

In 1999, the ISO Committee on conformity assessment (CASCO) developed the ISO/IEC 17025,
which specifies the general requirements for the competence to carry out tests and/or
calibrations, including sampling. It covers testing and calibration performed using standard
methods, non-standard methods, and laboratory-developed methods. This regulation is
applicable to all laboratories with any extent of the scope of testing and/or calibration
activities.

A forensic laboratory could and should pursue ISO accreditation to be strictly competent. This
standard has five components: scope, normative references, terms and definitions,
management requirements, and technical requirements. Management requirements and
technical requirements are the important elements of ISO/IEC 17025. To comply with quality
assurance and to obtain valid results, laboratories need to follow this standard.

ASCLD/LAB Accreditation:

The American Society of Crime Laboratory Directors/LAB (ASCLD/LAB) is an international body
that certifies forensics labs (not limited to digital forensics). Its main objective is to promote

Module 02 Page 112 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

development of laboratory management principles, professional interests, and techniques; to
acquire, preserve, and circulate forensic information; to improve and maintain easy
communication between crime laboratory directors; and to promote, maintain, and encourage
industrial standard practices.

The ASCLD provides guidelines for managing a forensics lab and for acquiring official crime-lab
certification. This institution certifies forensics labs that examine other criminal evidence such
as fingerprints and DNA samples. This kind of forensics lab is entirely different from a computer
forensics lab, which conducts different types of forensic examinations. ASCLD also offers a
detailed and wide-ranging certification program known as ASCLD/LAB. This board, called the
Laboratory Accreditation Board (LAB), offers objective principles for evaluation of the quality of
the work.

ASCLD/LAB recommends a certification track for digital forensics that integrates both ISO
standard 17025 and a supplemental ASCLD requirement that Is set explicitly to the laboratory
operations. A crime laboratory can voluntarily approach the Crime Laboratory Accreditation
Program of the ASCLD/LAB to prove that its management, operations, personnel, procedures,
instruments, physical plant security, and personnel safety procedures are up to the standards. A
laboratory with this accreditation ensures quality assurance. In addition, proficiency testing and
training laboratory personnel can provide better services to the case investigation.

Module 02 Page 113 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Industry

Standards

Russian: Russian Standard,
GOST P50739-95

American: DoD 5220.22-M

American: NAVSO P-5239-26

Ge : VSITR
rman (RLL)

American: NAVSO P-5239-26 (MFM)

Copyright © by . All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Destruction of data using industry standard data destruction methods is essential for sensitive
data that one does not want falling into the wrong hands. These standards depend on the levels
of sensitivity. Data deletion and disposal on electronic devices is only virtual, but physically it
remains, posing a security threat.

A hard disk stores the data in binary form and when the user tries to delete this data, it is
possible to recover the data using recovery tools. Some high-end technology tools also have the
provision to recover the overwritten data as well.

Methods like hard drive formatting or deleting partitions cannot delete the file data
completely. However, it is important to destroy the data and protect it from retrieval, after the
collection of evidence from the computer. Therefore, the only way to erase the data completely
and protect it from recovery Is to overwrite the data by applying a code of sequential zeroes or
ones.

The following are some important standards for data destruction:

» (American) DoD 5220.22-M: This standard destroys the data on the drive’s required
area by overwriting that sector three times with ones and zeros, again verifying whether
data is destroyed or not.

=» (American) NAVSO P-5239-26 (RLL): This is a three-pass overwriting algorithm that
verifies in the last pass.

Module 02 Page 114 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

=» (American) NAVSO P-5239-26 (MFM): This is a three-pass overwriting algorithm that
verifies in the last pass.

# (German) VSITR: This method overwrites in 6 passes with ones and zeros and then with
the letter A.

=" Russian Standard, GOST P50739-95: It is a wiping method that writes zeros in the first
pass and then random bytes in the next pass.

Module 02 Page 115 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Exam 312-49

dent and the problems caused by it

Aaa)

[

according to its severity

: loss or damage caused to the computer due to the incident

=r devices and systems being affected by the incident

ncident from spreading

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved Reproductions Strictly Prohibited.

Risk assessment is useful to understand information security issues in a business context and to
assess the impact to the business in case of a security breach.

Risk assessment helps senior management and decision makers in the organization to devise
appropriate risk mitigation strategies according to the organization’s goals and resources. A
proper risk assessment also helps in minimizing the impact of an incident.

Module 02 Page 116

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

_ Risk Assessment

Likelihood
Insignificant

(Minor problem
easily handled by
normal day to day
processes)

Almost Certain (e.<.
390% chance) High

Likely (e.g. between 50%

Moderate
and 90% chance)

Moderate (between
10% and 50% chance}

Unlikely (¢.2. between
33% and 106% chance)

Rare (e.g. <3% chance}

A risk assessment matrix is a graphical representation of the risks of a particular incident and its
impact. It helps to know about the likelihood of occurrence of the incident and severity of its

consequences. This matrix is easy to view and understand, as all the information is available in a

single table.

Module 02 Page 117

Minor
(Same disruption

possible, e.g.
damage equal to
$500k)

High

High

Moderate

Consequences

Moderate

(Significant
time/resources

required, e.g. damage
equal to 51 million)

High

High

Moderate

Moderate

Copyright © by

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Major
(Operations
severely
damaged, e.g.
damage equal to
510 millian))

Extreme

Catastrophic
(Business survival
is at risk damage
equal to 525
million}

All Rights Reserved Reproductions Strictly Prohibited.

Exam 312-49

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Exam 312-49

Copyright & by All Rights Reserved. Reproductions Strictly Prohibited.

After obtaining the required permissions and having assessed the case pre-requisites, the
investigators are ready to investigate the incident. The investigation phase includes various
stages and processes that need careful and systematic execution to obtain better results.

Module 02 Page 118

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Computer Forensics Investigation c H Fy
Methodology

First Response Search and
Seizure

Copyright © by BG-Gemmell. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is StrictlyProhibited.

The computer forensics investigation process is a collection of a wide variety of processes
starting from incident response to analysis of the crime scene, gathering evidence to its
analysis, and from documenting to reporting. Each step in this process is equally crucial for
acceptance of the evidence in a court of law and prosecution of the perpetrators.

Module 02 Page 119 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council

All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

© Investigators should havea clear idea about the goals of the examination prior to conductingthe investigation

@ They should have an in-depth technical understanding about the innerworkings of whatis being examined

@ Shouldhave capability to take a systematic approach to examine evidence based onthe request made, say for
example, a request made by an attorney

lf the client has asked you a question, think aboutit. How youcould prove (hypothesis) or disprove (null
hypothesis) it. Ee: lf you were asked to check for Dropbox installation on the suspect hard drive, consider:

& Operating system (05) installed, as artifacts to be examined for Dropbox installation diifersfor each OS
@ Previous research. Ifitis available forthe given question, itcan assist you

@ Basedon the above considerations, establish aform of reasoning that assists toform ahypothesis

@ Forthe given example, the hypothesis could be like:
@ Operating system installed is Windows 10

@ Dropbox is saidto be installed on the system if its artifacts are located in directories:
C:\Users\Admin\AppData\Roaming', or C:\Program Files (x86) or C:\Program Files

Copyright © by . All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Process (Cont’d)

i «After hypothesis formulation, frame an experiment to test it

(The test system should have an environment like that ofthe suspect machine toyield accurate results

Tool Selection

0 Digital forensicstools can be:

a Softwareor hardware

@ Commercial oropen source

@ Designed forspecific purposes or with broader functionality

lt is better to consider commercial tools that have a greater market value than open source tools
Using tools designed forspecific purposes will allow a diverse and in-depth investigation to take place
Nosingle toolis all-inclusive, thus itis recommended tohave multiple tools at hand

Using multiple tools validates the findings, thus enhancing reliability of the evidence

Forensics tool should undergo a validation process prior to using it fora casework as well as each time itis

modified or updated

NIST has launched the CFTT program, which has established a methodology for testing digital forensicstools
by development of general tool specifications, test procedures, test criteria, test sets, and test hardware

ey
‘une

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproductionis Strictly Prohibited.

Module 02 Page 120 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Experimental Design

After the formulating the hypothesis, investigators should prepare to experiment and test the
plans in order to check that they work. They need to simulate an environment similar to that of
the suspect machine to yield accurate results.

This process is a mock drill, and helps the investigator to experiment with various methods,
select suitable ones for different cases as well as select the type of tools required for the
process.

Tool Selection

Every case Is different and needs different methods of approach, while tools also differ
depending upon the platform, operating system, and type of the target device. Considerations
for selecting a tool include:

# Digital forensic tools can be:
o Software or hardware
o Commercial or open source
o Designed for specific purposes or with a broader functionality

» It is good to consider commercial tools that have a market value compared to open
source tools.

» Using tools designed for specific purposes will allow a diverse and in-depth
investigation.

#" No single tool is all-inclusive; thus, it is recommended to have multiple tools at hand.
» Using multiple tools validates the findings, thus enhancing the reliability of the evidence.

*# Forensic tools should undergo a validation process prior to using it for a case as well as
each time it is modified or updated.

=" The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has launched the Computer
Forensic Tool Testing (CFTT) project, which establishes a methodology for testing digital
forensic tools by developing general tool specifications, test procedures, test criteria,
test sets, and test hardware.

Module 02 Page 121 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Process (Cont’d)

Results Review and Evaluation

Review your results from different points of view and communicate findings to the client with
realistic expectations about why and how you arrived at your results

Conclusion and Opinion Formulation

Conclusion is judgement based on the facts
Ex: Installation of Dropbox on system can be confirmed on identifying its artifacts in locations
found during the investigation

Opinion is judgement or belief without certainty or proof. Itis solely based on science and/or
experience

Ex: Based onthe review of several artifacts, you may determine exactly when the Dropbox was
installed

Ifyou are supposed to testify at a trial, you must be prepared to explain how you arrived at your
conclusion or opinion

Copyright © by . All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

When a client first calls the investigator, the investigator should ask the following questions:

When a Client

Calls the Forensic Investigator

What happened?

Who is the incident manager?

What is the case name or title for the incident?

What is the location of the incident?

Under what jurisdiction are the case and seizureto be conducted?

What is to be seized (make, model, location, and ID)?

What other work will need to be performed at the scene (e.g., full search and evidence required)?

Is the search and seizure required to be overt or covert, and will local management be informed?

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Module 02 Page 122

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

to Prepare for a Computer

Forensics Investigation

Do notturn the computeroff or on, run any programs, or attemptto access data on
the computer. Anexpert should have the appropriate tools and expenence to prevent

data overwriting, damage from static electricity, orother concems

Secure any relevant media including hard drives, cell phones, DVDs, USB
drives, etc. the subject may have used

Suspend automated documentdestruction and recycling policies that
may pertain to any relevant media or users at the time of the issue

Performa preliminary assessment of the crime scene and identify the type of
data you are seeking, the information you are looking for, and the urgency
level of the examination

Once the machine is secured, obtain information about the machine, the
peripherals, and the network to which it is connected

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproductions Strictly Prohibited.

to Prepare for a Computer
Forensics Investigation (Cont’d)

Compilea list of names, e-mail addresses, and other identifying information of =
those with whom the subject might have communicated

image, note the user(s) who accessed it, what files they accessed, and when the

if the computer is accessed before the forensic expert is able to secure a mirror €
access occurred. If possible, find out why the computer was accessed

Maintaina chain of custody for each piece of original media, indicating where the is
media has been, whose possession it has been in, and the reason for that possession.

Create a list of key words or phrases to use when searching for relevant data i‘

Module 02 Page 123

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

W Decision makers are the people who implement policies and procedures for handling an
incident

Notify the decision maker for authorization when the written incident response policies
and procedures do not exist

@ After the authorization, assess the situation and define the course of action

Best practices:
Get authorization to Documentall the events Depending on the scope ofthe
conduct the investigation, and decisions at the time of incident and presence of any
from an authorized the incident and incident national security issues or life
decision maker response safety issues, the first priority is
to protect the organization from
further harm

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproductions Strictly Prohibited.

Module 02 Page 124 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Computer Forensics Investigation
Methodology

CHF

First Response Collect
the Evidence

Secure
the Evidence

Documentation
and Reporting

Copyright © by EG-Geanell. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is StrictlyProhibited.

First response refers to the first action performed after occurrence of a security incident.
Depending on the type of reaction, the first response can help the victim from further damage
and can help investigators easily trace the suspect.

Module 02 Page 125 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

The term first responder refers to a person who first arrives at a crime scene and accesses
the victim's computer system once the incident has been reported

The first responder may be a network administrator, law enforcement officer, or an
investigating officer

He or she is responsible for protecting, integrating, and preserving the evidence
obtained from the crime scene

The first responder should have complete knowledge of the investigation process and
procedures, and must investigate the crime scene ina lawful manner so that any evidence

obtained is admissible in the court of law

Copyright © by . All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

The term first responder refers to the persons who first arrive at the crime scene and access the
victim’s computer system after the victim has reported the incident. A first responder may be a
network administrator, law enforcement officer, or investigation officer. Generally, a first
responder is a person who comes from the forensics laboratory or from the particular agency at
the crime scene for initial investigation.

lf an incident occurs in a company or on individual computers, the victim first contacts the
forensics laboratory or a particular agency for crime investigation. Then, the laboratory or
agency sends the first responder to the crime scene for initial investigation. The first responder
is responsible for protecting, integrating, and preserving the evidence obtained from the crime
scene.

The first responder has complete knowledge of computer forensics investigation. He or she
preserves all discovered evidence in a simple, protected, and forensically sound manner. First
responders investigate the crime scene in a lawful manner so that the obtained evidence will be
acceptable in a court of law.

Module 02 Page 126 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

of First Responder

As the first person to arrive at the crime scene, the first responder plays an important role in computer
forensics investigation. Following are the main responsibilities of a first responder:

Identifying the crime scene

9

Protecting the crime scene

Preserving temporary and fragile evidence

Collecting all information about the incident

Documenting all findings

Packaging and transporting the electronic evidence

© OOOO

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproductions Strictly Prohibited.

Roles of First Responder

A first responder plays an important role in the computer forensics process because he or she Is
the first person who arrives at the crime scene for initial investigation. The investigation
process starts after collecting all the evidence from the crime scene. If the evidence collected
by the first responder is forensically sound, it is easier for the investigation team to find the
actual cause of the crime. Therefore, it is important for the first responder to collect proper
evidence.

The main responsibilities of first responders are:

Identifying the crime scene: After arriving at the crime scene, the first responder
identifies the scope of the crime scene and establishes a perimeter. Establishing a
perimeter includes a particular area, room, several rooms, or a building depending on
the networked computers. After that, the first responder starts listing the computer
systems that are involved in the incident from which he or she can collect the evidence.

Protecting the crime scene: In a cybercrime case, a search warrant is required for
searching and seizing digital/electronic evidence. Therefore, a first responder protects
all the computers and electronic devices and waits for the case officer in-charge.

Preserving temporary and fragile evidence: In the case of temporary and fragile
evidence that could change or disappear, such as monitor/screen information or a
running program, the first responder does not wait for the case officer in-charge. He or
she takes photographs of all the evidence.

Module 02 Page 127 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council

All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Collecting complete information about the incident: For collecting the complete
information about the incident, the first responder conducts preliminary interviews of
all persons present at the crime scene and asks questions about the incident.

Documenting all findings: The first responder starts documenting all information about
the collected evidence in the chain of custody document sheet. The chain of custody
document sheet contains information such as case number, name of the person who
reported the case, address and telephone number, location of the evidence, date/time
of collecting the evidence, and a complete description of the item.

Packaging and transporting the electronic evidence: After collecting the evidence, the
first responder labels all the evidence and places it in evidence storage bags, which
protect the evidence from sunlight and high temperature. These bags also block wireless
signals so that wireless devices cannot acquire data from the evidence. Then, the first
responder transports these packed bags to the forensics laboratory.

Gather preliminary information at the scene: At the time of an Incident, secure the
crime scene and the surrounding area to avoid any tampering of the evidence.
Preliminary information at the crime scene provides the basis for the forensics
investigation, and helps in finding the evidence easily, if there is no third-party
interference at the incident scene.

Preliminary information helps the investigators to verify if the crime had occurred, nature of
the incident, mark the perimeter, estimate the case process and expenditure, as well as gather
knowledge of the plaintiff.

The preliminary information at the incident scene offers the following details:

The type of incident.

Reason for the occurrence of the incident.

The potential damage due to the incident.

Potential evidence from scattered objects outside the attacked system.
Details of the person who used the system last before the incident.

People who first knew about the incident’s occurrence.

Module 02 Page 128 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council

All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Exam 312-49

First Response

Under no circumstances should anyone except qualified forensic analysts make any
attempts to collect or recover data from any computer systemor device that holds

electronic information

Any attempts to recover data by untrained persons could either compromise the
integrity of the files or result in the files being inadmissible in administrative or legal
proceedings

Any information presentinside the collected electronic devices is potential evidence
and should be treatedaccordingly

@) 4 The workplace or office must be secured, and protected to maintain the integrity of the
crime scene and the electronic storage media

Copyright © by . All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Module 02 Page 129 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Incident Response: Different
C/HFI
Situations Se

The first response to an incident may involve one of three different groups of people, each
having different tasks based on the circumstance of the incident

stem
pers

: q
i 1
r 4

- Different

Local managers or
other non-forensics
staff

Copyright © by BG-Gemmell. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is StrictlyProhibited.

The activity the first responder performs at the incident location has a great impact over the
investigation processes and can influence the accuracy or the success of the investigation

procedure. Therefore, investigation firms need to be careful while deciding the first response
team for an incident.

Module 02 Page 130 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

First Response by

The system administrator plays
an importantrole in ensuring
network protection and
maintenance, as well as
playing a vital role in the
investigation

The systems administrator
should not touch the system
unless directed to do so by
either the incident/duty
manager or one of the forensic
analysts assigned to the case

Once asystem administrator
discovers an incident, it must
be reported accordingto the
current organizational incident
reporting procedures

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproductions Strictly Prohibited.

The system administrator’s role is very important in ensuring network security and
maintenance as well as investigation of the security breach. The admin is responsible for
monitoring and maintenance of the system and these activities can become the basis for the
investigation during the forensic evaluation and administrative actions.

Once a system administrator discovers an incident, he or she must report it according to the
current organizational incident reporting procedures. He or she should then not touch the

system unless directed to, by either the incident response team or duty manager or one of the
forensic analysts assigned to the case.

The system administrator should explain to the investigator the security protocols and
procedures followed for using the systems and storage media. The admin might have to appear

for the legal proceedings to give explanation about the measures taken during the initial
shutdown or isolation of the subject computer.

Module 02 Page 131 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

First Response by

Non-forensics staff are responsible for securing the crime scene
“es O1 and making sure that it remains in asecure state until the
forensics team advises otherwise

a 02 They should also make notes about the scene and those
presentto hand over to the attending forensics team

. 03 The surroundingarea of a suspect computer should
be secured, not just the computer itself

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproductions Strictly Prohibited.

Module 02 Page 132 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

First Response by

The first response by laboratory forensics staff involves six stages:

Securing and Evaluatingthe ElectronicCrime Scene = Conducting Preliminary Interviews
@ Search warrant forsearch and seizure : @ Ask questions
@ Planfor search and seizure @ Check consentissues
8 Conduct the initial search of the scene ral 8 Witness signatures
@ Health and safety issues 5 8 = Initialinterviews

Collecting and Preserving the Electronic Evidence

@ Collectevidence 8 Deal with powered-
“ANS i off or powered-on

@ = Exhibitnumbering Fee iter at thie

@ Seize portable computers time of seizure

re the “Chain of Custody” is strictly
wed

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproductions Strictly Prohibited.
First response by laboratory forensic staff involves six stages:

Securing and evaluating the electronic crime scene

The process protects the crime scene from unauthorized access and keeps the evidence away
from harm. First response by laboratory forensic staff in this stage involves the following
considerations:

=" Search warrant for search and seizure
# Planning the search and seizure
=" Conducting the initial search of the scene

=" Health and safety issues

Conducting preliminary interviews

This activity helps investigators to identify all personnel, subjects, or others at the crime scene,
along with their position at the time of entry and the reason for being at the crime scene. This
stage involves:

» Asking questions
»" Checking the consent issues

» Witness signatures

=» nitial interviews

Module 02 Page 133 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Documenting the electronic crime scene

Documentation of the electronic crime scene is a continuous process during the investigation,
making a permanent record of the scene. This includes:

» Photographing the scene

» Sketching the scene

Collecting and preserving electronic evidence
Electronic evidence is versatile in nature and easily broken. The staff should be cautious when:
*" Collecting evidence

=" Dealing with powered OFF/ON computers at the time of seizure

» Seizing portable computers

» Preserving electronic evidence

Packaging electronic evidence

At the time of packaging all collected electronic evidence, the staff must document and enlist
the evidence, and all containers should be properly labeled to seize evidence. During packaging:

*" Follow exhibit numbering

= Fill the panel on the front of evidence bags with the proper details

» Avoid folding and scratching storage devices

# Label the containers that hold the evidence in an appropriate way

Transporting electronic evidence

Investigators should take special precautions for transporting the electronic evidence. Ensure
proper transporting procedures are followed to avoid physical damage:

» Ensure proper handling and transportation to the forensics laboratory

#" Have a strict chain of custody and keep track of all the forensics processes applied

Module 02 Page 134 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

First Responder

Often, when a computer crime incident occurs, the system or network administrator assumes the role of the
first responder at the crime scene

The system or network administrator might not know the standard first responder procedure or have a
complete knowledge of forensics investigation, so he or she might make the following common mistakes:

Assuming that some components of the victim’s computer may be reliable and usable

Not having access to baseline documentation about the victim's computer

Copyright © by All Rights Reserved. Reproductions Strictly Prohibited.

Most of the time when a computer crime incident occurs in the organization, a system or
network administrator takes charge as a first responder at the crime scene because many
organizations do not appoint a special forensic investigator for such types of incidents. The
system or network administrator cannot handle the computer crime security incidents in a
proper way because they do not know the first responder procedure or they do not have
complete knowledge of forensic investigation. In such cases, they make the following mistakes:

# Shutting down or rebooting the victim’s computer: In this case, the system loses the
complete volatile data, such as MAC time and log files, shuts down processes running
when shutting down and rebooting.

=» Assuming that some components of the victim’s computer may be reliable and usable:
In this case, using some commands on the victim’s computer may activate Trojans,
malware, and time bombs to delete vital volatile data.

= Not having access to baseline documentation about the victim’s computer.

» Not documenting the data collection process.

Module 02 Page 135 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

the Electronic

Crime Scene

@ Documentation of the electronic crime scene is a continuous process during the investigation that
creates a permanent record of the scene

@ The crime scene should be documented in detail and comprehensively at the time of the investigation

Document the physical crime scene, noting the position of the mouse and the location of
elements found near the system

Document details of any related or difficult-to-find electronic components

Record the state of computer systems, digital storage media, and electronic devices, including the
power status of the computer

Take a photograph of the computer monitor’s screen and note what was on the screen

ieee esses

Copyright © by . All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Documentation of the electronic crime scene is necessary to maintain a record of all the
forensic investigation processes applied to identify, extract, analyze, and preserve the evidence.
The details should include location of the crime, status of the system, connected network
devices, storage media, smart phones, mobile phones, PDAs, Internet and network access.

The document will help trace the serial numbers or other identifiers of the procured devices.
Documenting also includes taking photographs, video, notes, and sketches of the scene, in
order to recreate it later. The investigator needs to document the processes and activities
running on the display screens.

The points to consider while documenting the electronic crime scene are:

= Documentation of the electronic crime scene is a continuous process during the
investigation that makes a permanent record of the scene.

» It is essential to properly note down the site and state of computers, digital storage
media, and other electronic devices.

=" Document the physical crime scene, noting the position of the mouse and the location
of the elements found near the system.

= Document details of any related, difficult to find electronic components.

= Record the state of the computer system, digital storage media, electronic devices, and
predictable evidence, including power status of the computer.

Module 02 Page 136 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Exam 312-49
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

"= Take a photograph of the computer monitor’s screen and write notes on what you have
seen on the screen.

The crime scene documentation should contain comprehensive details at the time of
investigation.

Module 02 Page 137 Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator Copyright © by EC-Council
All Rights Reserved. Reproduction is Strictly Prohibited.

Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator
Computer Forensics Investigation Process

Exam 312-49

©

On arrival, thefirst step takenby the forensics
team should beto photograph the scene

The best course of action isto take various
photographsof the crime scene. Ex: Firsttake a

photographof the building and/oroffice number,
followed byan entry photograph, and thena

series of "360-degree” photographs

It is important to proceedallthe way fromthe
entire crime scene downto the smallest piece of
evidence

Photos should also be takenof the back of the
computersystem to accurately show how cables

are linked

an.
an.

—_.

Copyright © by

lt should be done ina way that will not alteror
damage the scene, andeverythingshould be
clearly visible

"360-degree” photographs are simply
overlapping photographs depictingtheentire
crime scene

Crime scenephotographs should betakenofthe
work area, including equipmentsuch as computer
disks, handwritten documents, andother
components ofthe system (printers and external
drives}

lf this cannot be done on-site, thenall cables
must be labeledsothe computer system can

be reconnected at the forensics laboratory and
photographed

All Rights Reserved. Reproductionis Strictly Prohibited.

Crime scenes are the main source of physical evidence and photographing it will provide the
investigators with a visual reference for future use. The images will also help the investigators
recreate the scene when required.


